# A Stage-Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems

## Abstract

1. Design Personal Informatics systems in a holistic manner.
2. Allow iteration between stages.
3. Apply an appropriate balance of automation and user control at each stage to facilitate the user experience.
4. Explore support for associating multiple facets of people's lives.

## Introduction

1. Identify problems across PI tools.
2. Introduce a model that improves the diagnosis of problems in PI systems.
3. Recommendations on how to build new systems.

## Methodology

A survey of **68 broadly tech-savvy** people that collect their own personal information and investigated what tools were used, when and how often they were used, motivation for their use, problems and suggestions for improvement.

### Personal Information Collected

| Ranking | Automatically collected information | #   |
| ------- | ----------------------------------- | --- |
| 1       | Bank statements                     | 54  |
| 3       | Credit card bills                   | 38  |
| 7       | Financial software                  | 23  |
| 8       | Electricity bill                    | 23  |
| 11      | Heating bill                        | 12  |

| Ranking | Manually collected information | #   |
| ------- | ------------------------------ | --- |
| 1       | Calendar events                | 27  |
| 2       | Status updates                 | 22  |
| 4       | Blog posts                     | 21  |
| 5       | Weight                         | 21  |
| 6       | Exercise                       | 20  |
| 11      | Journals or diaries            | 16  |
| 13      | Sleeping habits                | 12  |
| 14      | Food consumption               | 12  |
| 16      | Health                         | 9   |

Out of all of data categories, **finance**, **journaling**, **exercise** and **general health** were selected as most relevant and interesting.

### Tools Used

Collection needs to be accessible immediately. Graphing of information is important and should be customisable.

## Stages and Barriers

- The **Preparation Stage** occurs before people start collecting personal information and concerns itself with people's motivation to collect, decisions on what information to record and how.
  - People can often abandon their data on previous tools because compatibility is limited.
- The **Collection Stage** is the time when people collect information about themselves. There are different frequencies of collection for different types of data such as collecting food intake information multiple times a day, but only recording exercise a few times a week. Barriers include:
  - (14/68) **Access to the tool used to record** - This suggests a mobile phone app is a good way forward.
  - (12/68) **Remembering to record data** - Prompting notifications could solve this.
  - (6/68) **Accuracy** - Trying to enforce hard numbers against real life leads to friction where people don't know the exact mass of the meal they just had in grams etc.
- The **Integration Stage** lies between the collection and reflection periods where the information is prepared, combined and transformed for the user to reflect on. It is determined by how much effort the user has to put into preparing the data for the reflection stage.
  - (12/68) **Transcribing data** - The system should also visualise the data, not just take it in.
  - (4/68) **Scattered visualisations** - The system should provide multiple visualisations in one place.
- The **Reflection Stage** is when the user reflects on their information. Barriers include:
  - (10/68) **Lack of time** - The system should quickly show the user a reflective interpretation of their data without a great deal of effort.
  - (6/68) **Holistic viewing** - Visualizations should be able to go back to the first data entries.
  - (5/68) **Self-criticism** - It's sometimes hard to look at the very oldest data in the same way that old photos are sometimes embarrassing.
- The **Action Stage** is the stage when people take action based on their newfound understanding following reflection on their data. Some systems provide suggestions as to what to do next which helps people understand their data.

### Barrier Cascade

Problems upstream in the stages of the model cascade into later stages, meaning that a holistic approach to solving problems in the system is needed. For example, if a user lacks motivation in the collection stage, they won't have enough data to produce a visualisation that they can reflect on properly.

### Iterative Stages

As people progress through the stages, they change their minds on a variety of different elements of their system, like collection method and which data to collect among others. This suggests that systems need to be flexible by:

- Supporting importing information from other systems.
- Supporting different kinds of information. Could there be a generalisation where users could design their own data collection?

### Driving Forces

Each stage can be categorised as either **user-driven**, **system-driven** or a combination of the two.

- **User-driven** stages demand time an attention from the user which can be problematic when demand on their time becomes to great. This can be mitigated to an extent by providing incentives, but a stage may need the responsibility transferred to the system.
- **System-driven** stages are where the system itself takes on the responsibility of performing the tasks of that stage.

It is important that consideration is taken to alleviate demands on the user, but to balance that against the loss of control and possible inaccuracies that might occur.

### Facets

**Uni-faceted** systems that focus on the collection and integration of one type of data are simpler and easier to manage, but limit the insights that can be gained without allowing comparison to other facets. However, the greater informativity of **multi-faceted** systems is offset against increased difficulty of data collection and limit of the time users are willing to expend on getting such insights.

## Conclusion

To build effective personal informatics systems, developers should:

- Due to barrier cascade, a holistic approach should be taken building PI systems.
- Since stages are iterative, flexibility within and without the system is important; allowing users to change what data they collect and transfer data between other systems.
- Each stage should take a middle-line between being systems or user driven taking the difficulty away without the control.
- There is a gap for multifaceted systems that associate and allow reflection on different areas of users lives.
