# Understanding Quantified Selfers' Practices in Collecting and Exploring Personal Data

## Abstract

Using the most extreme users (**Q-Selfers**) of Personal Informatics systems to find insights, and pitfalls in self-tracking.

## Items Tracked

| Field Tracked | %age |
| ------------- | ---- |
| Activity      | 40   |
| Food          | 31   |
| Weight        | 29   |
| Sleep         | 25   |
| Mood          | 13   |

This is thought to be different to the results in _A Stage-Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems_ because Q-Selfers did not consider readily available data self-tracking. Furthermore, on average these users track approximately 3 items.

## Motivations

There were broadly three motivations for Q-Selfers to track themselves:

1. **To improve health**.
   - To cure or manage a condition.
   - To achieve a goal.
   - To find triggers.
   - To answer a specific question.
   - To identify relationships.
   - To execute a treatment plan.
   - To make better health decisions.
   - To find balance.
2. **To improve other aspects of life**.
   - To maximise work performance.
   - To be mindful.
3. **To find new life experiences**. - To satisfy curiosity and have fun. - To explore new things. - To learn something interesting.
   For those who experienced positive outcomes from self-tracking, PI was an approach to a better life.

## Pitfalls

1. **Tracking too many things** - by tracking too many things, users experienced _tracking fatigue_ or did not reflect at all due to data being in many different formats. There are some ways to mitigate this such as:
   - Automating as much of data collection as possible.
   - Lowering data granularity (e.g. just a binary).
   - Making recording as easy as possible (e.g. as simple as pushing a button).
2. **Not tracking triggers and context** - Q-Selfers often experienced trying to track symptoms, leading to no insight into how to cure the underlying problems following reflection necessitating a reframing of the initial questions and thus what to track showing the need to maintain flexibility in the PI system.

## Visualisation

The most common visualisations were **line** and **bar** charts, produced in a spreadsheet tool indicating that the ability to export data in a CSV or other compatible format is useful.

Q-Selfers often built custom tools in order to track and explore data in a single tool, but struggled to work out the best visualisations to understand the data. This ability to analyse data on one platform is also important to provide early feedback on the relationships between tracked factors in order to reduce the data tracked - thus reducing fatigue or allowing greater data collection.
