# Personal Tracking as Lived Informatics

## Abstract

This paper is different to others in that it reflects on the way that people use personal informatics in the wider context of their lives, particularly in social and collaborative ways. This paper focuses almost exclusively on **fitness** Personal Informatics systems.

## Introduction

People were not changing their behaviour because of technology, but were in fact using technology in order to change.

## Findings

Five overlapping styles of personal tracking were found:

1. **Directive Tracking** - Many people set goals or limits for various collected data based on a goal derived either externally from the tracker itself or from their internal motivation.
2. **Documentary Tracking** - Some people were interested in documenting their activities rather than changing anything. Trackers were used to tell stories about themselves, and were typically short-term endeavours. To some extend all participants did some kind of documentary tracking.
3. **Diagnostic Tracking** - This form of tracking is characterised by the desire to find a link between two sets of tracked data, such as why an individual might be tired after getting an adequate amount of sleep. This kind of tracking was often not undertaken over the long-term; typically only until a satisfactory answer was found.
4. **Collecting Rewards** - Some people would use tracking in order to claim rewards from external schemes or would pay particular attention to their speed at certain sections of a ride in order to track achievements.
5. **Fetishised Tracking** - Some participants were self-tracking because of a purer interest in gadgets and technology.

People would also want to inspect multiple sources of data even if they recorded almost the same information. Furthermore users had different views on the accuracy of the data that was collected, some just wanted one big easy to understand figure that they could see going up or down whereas others were significantly more interested in more concrete metrics.

One interesting finding was the lack of valuation for long-term data analysis; many of the participants would only look at data during the activity it was measuring particularly for fitness, or only on the day it was recorded. Many were not concerned about losing old data or making longitudinal conclusions from their data either.

### Sociality of Personal Tracking

Although the nominally social features (such as sharing to social media) were hardly ever used by participants but the ability to compete against strangers was mentioned and liked.

## Recommendations

- Do not expect users to act rationally in selecting and moving between trackers.
- Consider personal tracking as social tracing, but not in the social media sense, but in the sense of allowing co-present tracking, kinship, competition and play.
- Design for interweaving between trackers, not just integration. Consider how a tracker will be used in an information ecology.
- Consider behavioural change is achieved by people across various interleaved technologies.
- Evaluation should address more than measuring improvements in activity. Consideration should be given to the emotionality of tracking.
- Attend to the physicality of tracking and whether the tracking medium is appropriate in the given circumstance.
