# Exploring Goal-Setting, Rewards, Self-Monitoring, and Sharing to Motivate Physical Activity

## Introduction

- **Goal-setting** - users reported benefits from being able to concurrently pursue both _primary_ and _secondary_ goals.
- **Rewards** - users did not find rewards motivating.
- **Self-monitoring** - users did find reminder notifications very helpful.
- **Sharing** - many barriers remained to sharing information with a support group but users that tried it found some benefits.

## Implementation

### Goal-Setting

Users set goals for the calendar week and are broken down into three categories: **cardio**, **strength** and **flexibility**. Goals are set in twos, where on is a primary goal, but the other can be more realistic or a stretch goal depending on what the user wants to do.

### Rewards

The rewards system used consisted of a "trophy case" that showed trophies and ribbons corresponding to completed goals and activities in the preceding four weeks.

### Self-Monitoring and Reminders

The applications provided notifications to journal physical activities as well as using a badge on the app icon to indicate the number of consecutive days since journaling.

### Sharing

Posting to the user's Facebook NewsFeed was supported whenever the user completed a goal or journalled. There was also a feature to send updates to a smaller subset of a Facebook friend group in order to improve privacy and make users more comfortable with sharing.

## Results

- **Goal Setting** - users typically used one goal as their main goal and another as their stretch goal. This was found to be particularly helpful in their process.
- **Rewards** - very few users were actually motivated by rewards. This was possibly because the rewards were not surprising so perhaps a hidden set of targets should exist to power rewards.
- **Self-Monitoring and Reminders** - users found being able to enter their data quickly was rewarding and satisfyingly casual. The reminders to users to enter data was _extremely_ well liked.
- **Sharing** - users thought that the support group idea was good, but Facebook friend groups were indeed to broad. Very few actually used this feature.
