# Intelligent Computing in PI: Key design considerations

The paper focuses on suggestions to how intelligent computing can help improve support systems that 
track user activities in the way that they also provide a richer understanding of that data. 

## Summary

* Challenges and opportunities in current PI research 
* Survey of established techniques and approaches from areas of IC 
* Development of a model that collates issues regarding collaboration between human and system. 

## Notes

5 stages of PI processes: 

* Preparation stage: before collecting data, motivations for data collection, defining what data and how to collect it. 
* Collection stage: when data is collected subsequently every day 
* Integration stage: data is prepared for analysis 
* Reflection stage: analysed data is considered in terms of reliability and to decide upon potential action-taking 
* Action stage: users make informed choices of what to do given the insight obtained through PI process 

These all have barriers depending on the targeted users

System should:
* maintain a balance between automated sensing and manual self-report
* avoid too systematic behaviour as it does not match the not so systematic context of daily life
* provide an objective starting point for personal reflection rather than promote behaviour found to be positive by its designers.
**(Perhaps when the user registers, have a small questionnaire to know what’s unique about them)**
* provide correlation between data. Individuals can be too uncomfortable to interpret their own data

### The three major relationship types between human and machine
#### Cooperative
Level of automation, concern of automation, adaptive autonomy. 
How independent is the system? How much should humans supervise it?  
Sometimes supervision is needed for critical situations (would we need a supervisor for our action decisioning?) 

Mixed initiative systems involve the human and the computer agreeing on something together (Maybe gather feedback about whether user is happy with the proposed action so that system can make better judgements. Sometimes the user might be wrong such as them refusing to stop smoking, but the system could find a better solution such reduce the amount of cigarettes by one for example and make more gradual improvements in such situations)

#### Augmented
Machine integrates with and enhances human capabilities. (Ask the user whether they would like to improve their lifestyle and how) 
Three domains to consider: 
* memory – record events and data, 
* motivation – remind user of final goal and provide stimulation, 
* decision making – consider knowledge, determine best decision and present it in the most user friendly way

#### Ambient
a mindful monitoring agent, running in the background and includes sensing + reasoning based on what user presents. (Fitbit) 
Hard balance between autonomous actino and interaction with user.  
**(Probably not the best relationship as we can see in article 6 that this kind of relationship sometimes provide inaccurate data)**

User must be able to communicate with system about computer initiated human actions as it would affect their use of the system and hence potential failure of system if they are not able to express themselves. Communicating with the system about its behaviour allows the system to revisit itself

### Cooperative Action Orchestration
* Human-driven cooperation: 
  * Acknowledge user of system's capabilities. Best way to do that is make the system models visible and understandable. 
  * Show the effects of user choices. 
  * UI is important (most convenient would be mobile but we could consider web) 
* Revised computing system behaviour (human initiated computer action): 
  * Decide on level of automation 
  * Requires understanding of application domain and user behaviour 
  * Can create complexities 
  * Different users would revise differently (Perhaps it is not the best to give users much power with this) 
* Computing-driven cooperation (computer exists in the background and interacts with human): 
  * For this to be possible we need a physical device to sense data. (Inaccuracy) 
  * If computer interjections are frequent or irrelevant it will cost the user experience 
* Revised human behaviour (computer initiated human action): 
  * Revises how human practice changes as a result of the interactions with the computer system 
  * System should be able to adapt to human behaviour changes
  
## Design suggestions

Goals are an equal concern to both parties. The system is not just for recording data 

Consider conceptual designs which shift the focus of behaviour change to a joint human-system effort 

Engage human in the system capabilities 

What kind of relationship will we have between human and system and how/will this vary over the course of use? 

Gather feedback for the use of system in order to improve 

Explore forms of real-time system-provided feedback to decrease the need for sophisticated post hoc data analysis by the user - I.e. shift from context-recording to context-aware 

Do not just present data readings, provide understanding 

Provide insight into the autonomous behaviour of the system 

User feedback on system interjections 

Include possibilities for immediate action 
