# Sleep tracking in the real world

Interview study with 12 people using Fitbit devices aiming to improve their sleep

## Abstract

Overall, this way of self tracking increased awareness for sleep habits but lead to no improvements.
Barriers:
* Unawareness of what is normal sleep 
* Struggle to identify reasons for a lack of sleep 
* Unawareness of how to act 

## Notes

Sleep deprivation impacts concentration, mood and memory. Chronic sleep problems associated with obesity, diabetes and high blood pressure. (Consider when collecting data for sleep improvement) 

Fitbit-like devices help for keeping track of awakenings during night and insights into sleep stages. Not as accurate as home sleep test. 

Environment affects quality of sleep – mattress, temperature, noise, light. Lifestyle affects it too – stress, exercise, diet, use of technology.

## The interview study
– 10 females, 2 males. As preparation, they filled out the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index questionnaire. (Is it worth using that as part of our project?) 

Fitbit helps participants become more aware of their sleep patterns. The awareness depends on the reasons why participants began self-tracking in the first place. Some people noticed different patterns during different times of the week (Perhaps to do with work habits) 

* Unawareness of good sleep: there must be indication on normal sleep stats (get a database and fill it with data from studies). We need to interpret data to user. But is what is normal for other people necessarily good normal for this specific person. Lack of accuracy of Fitbit-like devices can lead to inaccurate sleep data (other people/pets moving in bed or lying in bed while awake). 

* No identified reasons for sleep problems: Fitbit doesn't connect sleep to potential factors. It doesn't present the data of sleep tracking and something else together so users can't make the connection. (We need to make that clear and show the correlation). Fitbit doesn't track many factors, they might require too much manual commitment. 

* Unawareness of how to act: Weekly reports don't help with taking actions. Harder to set a motivating goal to improve sleep. 

## Some personal thoughts

(If the main outcome of sleep tracking was to raise awareness, is it worth tracking sleep? Maybe include a question for every morning to ask about feelings of user to determine quality of sleep). 

(With regards to comparing one's sleep pattern according to what's normal, we could instead compare other factors that are better in terms of goal setting and tracking). 

(However, this could mean more data in DB, but maybe better quality > small quantity since sleep tracking isn't reliable in terms of accuracy). 

## Design suggestions

* Additional physiological data such as brainwave signals, heart rate signals, galvanic skin response. (not doable) 

* Present different data together so that correlations can be made.(feasible) 

* Tools that can analyse sleep data and compare to factors. (feasible) 

* Include recommendations for improvement having considered personal information such age, gender, sleep disorders. A combination of numerical data and text instructions (feasible) 
