# On Being Told How We Feel: How Algorithmic Sensor Feedback Influences Emotion Perception
A paper based on two studies investigating the efffects of mood-tracking apps, specifically how people's moods can be affected by the outputs and insights given by them.

## Summary
- People often have quite rudimentary understandings of how the algorithms of mood tracking apps work
- Efforts to make these algorithms more transparent don't always help the users understand them
- The abilites of these algorithms are often overestimated
  - One effect of this is that some people will trust the output of the algorithm over their own feelings

## Study 1: Survey of Stress Tracking Expectations and Needs
The first study was a survey of stress tracking expectations and needs.

### Participants
The participants of this survey were 188 students from a large university in the US.
Young adults were the focus of the study as they are known to have particularly high levels of stress. 
They were between the ages of 18 and 31 (mean: 19.81) and mostly female (138 female, 48 male, 2 genderqueer).
77.65% reported having used a tool to track their mood or health, mostly physical health trackers like FitBit and Google Fit.

### Survey
The survey focussed on three main points:
#### Knowledge of PI systems
- Which commercial PI systems had they heard of?
#### Self-relevant data types
- Which aspects of their life would they like a tool to automatically track?
#### Justifications and expectations
- Why do you want to track this data?
- In what situations would you like this data to be tracked?
- What would you expect from a system that tracks this data?

### Results
Respondents selected automatic mood and stress tracking as their top two interests for a PI system, however most had little knowledge of existing systems.
This meant that they didn't have anything from which they could base their mental model of how the system works.
The primary motivation for having automatic mood (61.3%) and stress (44.8%) tracking was improved self-understanding.
Their justifications were often related to how the app could serve as an objective measure of their experiences.
However, many also showed that such a system would supersede their own awareness:
- "***We never really know** how stressed we are*"
- "*Sometimes **I cannot tell even my own emotions***"
- "*to have my beliefs **proved***"

### Conclusion
Many students are interested in stress and emotion tracking, however many have limited knowledge of existing systems to base expectations from.
This may affect their ability to interpret information given by the system.
This blind trust in the system could be problematic in situations where different products give widely different interpretations of similar data.

## Study 2: Impact of Automatic Stress Tracking Frames on Stress Experiences
The second study investigates whether users will continue to trust the 'objective standards' of these PI systems when they had a direct experience to compare against.

### Participants
The participants of this study were 64 students from a large university in the US.
16 self-identified as male, 48 as female.

### Experiment
An EDA (electrodermal activity) sensor is held between the thumb and forefinger and a smartwatch is worn on the wrist.
When the EDA sensor detects increased EDA, the smartwatch vibrates to give haptic feedback.
The participants were told that the haptic feedback indicated different things depending on the group that they had been randomly assigned to:
#### Group 1: Negative framing
Told that the EDA vibration feedback indicated increased *stress*
#### Group 2: Positive framing
Told that the EDA vibration feedback indicated increased *alertness and engagement*
#### Group 3: Control
Were not given any explanation of what the system was doing

The participants completed 36 questions from an abstract reasoning test, increasing in difficulty.
Each question had a 25 second time limit, and the participants were all given immediate feedback on whether they had correctly answered the question or not.

### Results
- Participants actively evaluated how the system operated, focusing on which of their behaviors triggered system feedback
- Some participants viewed the system as surpassing their own abilities, providing apparent insights and augmenting self-awareness
- Both positive and negative version of the system were judged as moderately accurate, with some even deferring to the system when it conflicted with their personal evaluations
- There were no differences in ratings of accuracy between conditions
- Perceptions were altered by system frames. The negative description resulted in the greatest increases of anxiety
- In contrast, positive framing had some benefits with those participants describing their experiences most positively
